My family, filled with smart, shrewd and funny people, would shrug
their collective shoulders and ask, "What good is college?" Only my
mom, who died when I was young, valued education. I knew that because
her single ambition for me growing up was that I might marry a man
with a degree.

I applied to college only because my high school history teacher told
me the place he'd attended on a football scholarship just started
accepting female students. He thought maybe I had a shot.

When I told my relatives that I was heading to New Hampshire in 1975,
they assumed I was pregnant. Why else would an 18-year-old girl leave
the state?

"It happened to your cousin," one aunt whispered as I boarded the bus
for White River Junction. "You can always come home."

They were skeptical about what I'd learn in some cold building far
away that I couldn't learn in Brooklyn. What was an education going to
get me — except into trouble?

I had no idea what I wanted to do or wanted to be, but I wanted a
degree of my own. Revising my mother's wishes, I didn't just want to
stand next to someone who was knowledgeable. I wanted to be
knowledgeable.

Also, an education can't divorce you.

Besides, receiving an education is different from getting a degree. A
degree is like a wedding ring: It's meaningless if it's there just for
show. Like a thin piece of gold, a printed piece of paper — even in a
fancy font — is worthless unless it represents substantial personal
commitment.

An education is about learning things you don't know. Just as we need
to try foods we've never eaten before, we need to approach unfamiliar
subjects. Life's menu can be innovative, varied and delightful, but
without outside influences, it can too often be limited, boring and
unappetizing.

I have a friend who pretty much eats only those things she was served
in childhood: meat, potatoes, beans and applesauce. She's not
excessively fun when it comes to dining out.

Curiosity, like originality and delight, has to be nurtured. But if we
keep emphasizing the notion of familiarity and security at the expense
of new and potentially challenging experiences, then we'll be stuck
with the intellectual equivalent of a 1968 Swanson's TV dinner.

Authentic education demands that students learn and not merely that
they are taught. It's not about simply offering access to information
or data. What happens in classrooms is not the same as what happens at
UPS: It is not like transferring an unexamined parcel of information
from one person to another. It must include, as all reputable teachers
know, instructing students in academic discipline and personal
responsibility.

This is one reason that students should be required to take classes
from outside their area of specialization. Their futures are under
construction. While they may have blueprints in place, perhaps handed
down through their families or fantasies from glittering daydreams,
there are many architectural models from which to choose. That way
they won't end up with the academic equivalent of a five-story
one-bedroom apartment with no kitchen and a bathroom on the roof.

Unable to predict the ineffable results of education, I worry we're
defining it in merely quantifiable terms — judging institutions,
subjects and majors by how much money their graduates earn once
they're in the workplace. That's not an assessment of a demanding
course of study. That's an assessment of who makes coin. If that's all
anybody needs to know, I could have stayed in the old
neighborhood. Gangsters, after all, make more money than anybody else.

An authentic liberal arts education has value of a different kind:
It's a triumph over ignorance and a refusal to be intimidated by the
unknown.

It's about taking a class in a cold building on a quiet morning and
learning that words, as well as numbers, in the proper sequence, can
unlock the universe. It's about proficiency, of course, but it's also
about perspective.

It's not what you "get" out of college that changes your life; it's
what you're given. You gain authority not only over subjects but over
yourself.

As my family predicted, education got me into trouble — but it was
trouble for which I looked, not from which I ran. That's the payoff.
